to return for a final pass. This time down the
original line of aircraft on my first pass. With
more time and better light, I could do a better job.
A larger-sized Jap plane stood out from the
others. Looked like a recce plane, perhaps. A what
kind? Recce. Reconnaissance. Oh, okay. I settled
on it as my primary and let go. It seemed to shake
itself to pieces right in front of me as I bored down
a point. With inches to spare, I pulled off and
raked subsequent aircraft with my fire. God only
knows how many aircraft were damaged or destroyed
in that one pass. I don't know. I just said... Only
seven or eight minutes at the most had passed, and I
recall seeing only one P-40, Bartlington. As I
banked again, I caught a glimpse of three aircraft
to my upper right. I choked. Were they Japs? Nope.
Three P-40s pulling off the attack. It's amazing
to think back how without any specific detailed
pre-planning that experienced people knowing
what they do, just start and stop something in such
coordination as this. It's just unbelievable,
but that's the way it happened. And so your three
colleagues were up above, and they were fleeing.
Yeah. Oh, yeah. It's time to get out of there. To
hell with pushing my luck. I backed up and pulled up
to join them. And now we were on our way back home. I
looked back at the field as I rounded the southwest
corner of the mountain and did my heart good. What
satisfaction. This is what I said to myself.
That's for Mogwe and old Swartz, you bastards.
Swartz was a pilot that was caught in a bomber
attack at Mogwe and killed on the ground. These
successive passes and resulting destruction in
that 10 to 12 minutes of aerial attack with nothing
but fighter high caliber gunfire are too much to
describe completely. The entire airfield seemed
to be in flames the last time I saw it as we headed
northwest back to Burma. As we learned later, the
entire Japanese Southeast Asian Air Force was out
of action for a good two weeks. We had apparently
caught them as they amassed a major concentration
of aircraft just before making a big strike
against us in China. and see the old man this way he
planned it. Sure. Great planning. At that time,
however, my only thoughts were centered on pride
of a mission accomplished exactly according to
plan, to Chennault's plan.
So then you continued back. Can I get you now? So you
continued back. How proud he would be. Hell, I was.
Yeah.
I learned later Bob Neal and Pepper Gornian had
made several scraping passes and retired also. Ed
Rector and McGarry, they were at the top, the top
cover, and they were coming back also. So all six of
you are going back now? Now, all six of us are on our
way back. And the
four of us were together, I think, going back. And
Bob Neal somehow and one of the other guys got off.
with two aircraft. But I remember only four of us
together because Blackback McGarry was in my
flight, and I noticed he began to trail back. And
our little radio wouldn't work. He couldn't
depend on it. Couldn't talk to him. So I started
circling real slow and to turn back, let him catch
up. And he kept going straight forward. wouldn't
turn to go with us. And I knew, he knew where we were
going, and he was trying to get there, but
something was wrong. Because by dawn on me, he was
in trouble. And pretty soon, sure enough, I slowed
down and started circling around him with the
other guy. And pretty soon, black smoke started
coming out of his airplane. I knew he was in
trouble, and he started losing altitude. And he
was going to slow, but we had to put our flaps down in
front of him to stay with him. And I think I remember
trying then to talk to him on the radio, but never
could get him. And I flew up close enough to him
where his his canopy was open and smoke was blowing
out of the side of his airplane. And he was getting
lower and lower. And I could tell, you know, he'd
left for a place to land. This was jungle, hill. And
we hadn't quite got to the, I think it's the Salween
River that separates the two countries from
Thailand. And I held up a map. I figured something
was going to happen. I held up a map to show it to him
that, you know, I was, Robert, let him know that I
had a map I'd get to him. I don't know why I did it, but
I just held up a map and waved to him. And he'd look at
me every once in a while. And I'd see him every few
seconds. Then he'd look back at me. And finally,
all of a sudden, his airplane just, he just rolled
his airplane over like that. And he fell out. He was
bailing out. Oh, so he rolled his airplane over
upside down. To get out. To bail out. He was doing
bail out. He knew something. He couldn't land. He
had to bail out. Obviously, his airplane was. He
knew it was gone. Yeah. So he had to get out. And when
he bailed out, then I started circling to show his
chute open. And I saw him hit the ground, but in the
trees, or some of those trees, I was 200 feet from
him. But at any rate, I shoot. His chute did open.
Oh, yeah. And he floated down. And subsequently,
well, I spoke to him. He was captured as a prisoner.
He was captured by the Japanese then? Yeah. He was
just about two or three miles short of that river
he'd been in. And I flew over there and dropped my
map over it. I don't know. I doubt if he ever found
it. I never did ask him. But then, you know, we're
getting old guys. So I said, well, we're old black
men. So I wiggled for the other guys. What happened
to him? He was captured by the Japs and held
prisoner of war until the end of the war. And I saw
him at a reunion we had yesterday. Oh, back in
the early 70s, and old Black Mac had gone through a
rough time. As a matter of fact, he was a little off
his rocker, but he was all right. And he never did
talk much about it, but apparently it was a shock to
him. Anyway, I don't know where he is now. Okay, so
that's what happened to one of them. That gives you
five planes. Yeah. So we went on and recovered at
Namsan. Now, we were reasonably sure that there
wasn't going to be any airplane that got off that
air base to follow us up, you know, and attack us
while we were refueling. Five of you landed. Well,
yes.
Five, right. Actually, we anticipated nine. New
Kirk flight, I haven't even talked about it yet.
Anticipated seven. You anticipated seven. I
anticipated four.
I anticipated a total of nine airplanes. See, ten
of us took off. Okay, so you're right. Nine. Nine.
Okay. In other words, we expected nine aircraft to
recover at the damn time. We've got to have to get
those damn things refueled and get them off of
there. Yeah. Okay. But where were the other four
going? Well, I'll tell you that. Okay, you're
going to tell me. Okay. Well, we landed. And I
explained to Bob Neal what had happened to Black
Mac McGarry. And we discussed this thing. And then
here come three other airplanes out of the other
four, Newkirk's flight. They come in. And we said,
where's Newkirk? And then they told the story.
Well, part of the plan with Newkirk was to take off
the same time we did, 10 airplanes that morning,
All of us were supposed to run and go over the field
at 10,000 feet. For some reason or other, Newkirk
never did even go to 10,000 feet with his three
other airplanes. But his mission was to hit
another air base.
He was supposed to hit one. Now, Newkirk's flight
was supposed to attack an air base at... Lam Lung,
L-A-M-B-L-U-N-G, which was another Japanese air
base just south of Chiang Mai, about 20 miles. It so
happened that Newkirk, for some reason or
another, remember I told you he was very depressed
and sad, he and his three remaining guys never
could explain it. He just said that they took off,
and he never did climb at 10,000 feet, but he
immediately took off on a course down the
railroad, which passed Chiang Mai, Thailand,
about two or three miles, three or four miles to the
east of the field. And he stayed right on that
railroad at low altitude. And that, he got there a
little bit ahead of us, see, having started at low
altitude, and we climbed at 10,000 feet and crewed
down, so we were a little behind him. So that
explained why Japanese were getting into their
airplanes, were actually in their airplanes with
the props turning, Because when his flight passed
over the depot near the city, that got the alert to
the air base, and they at least had that alert. But
fortunately, we got there in time before they
could do anything else. Because just as they were
getting in airplanes, and now they saw we were
hitting them, so they started running for cover.
And he went on down, and strafing, by the way, down
the railroad track. He went on down to Lam Lung, and
there wasn't a single thing at that air base. So
they turned around, coming back, strafing that,
you know, targets of opportunity that came back.
Of course, it's daylight now. And they said when we
passed by the depot again at Chiang Mai, we could
look up and say there was no doubt where Chiang Mai
Air Base was. Said there was nothing but just a mass
of black smoke over there in the air, up going over
10,000, 15,000. And It was along there that they
said Newkirk made a dive on what appeared to be an
armed vehicle, an armed personnel carrier, that
type of thing. They had a gun, a heavy caliber gun.
It wasn't a tank. But he said as he dove on it, this
heavy caliber gun shot. And evidently, whatever
it was, caught his airplane, smacked down, and he
just went right on in. Killed him to death. That's
what happened to Jack Newcoat. The other three
came on back and then they recovered at the same
place as them saying, right after we did, and
that's where then we got the story. So all of us
refueled and then went on over to the lower wing.
Okay, well this guy then almost sabotaged your
mission. That's right. We don't know if he did it
because he was shaken up because of, you know, not
being given command of the thing. I've heard
stories from some of his squadron that actually
Jack Newkirk was the boy that dreamed up the
mission and got Jonathan Ault to prove it. And if
that's the case, then he had more right to be shaken
up and felt bad about the old man giving it to Bob
Neal. But nevertheless, he disobeyed orders.
Well, he disobeyed orders, or for some reason or
another, unknowing to us, he couldn't comply with
it. But anyway, he didn't do what he was supposed to
do. And actually, we couldn't wait on him. That
could have jeopardized your life. It could have
jeopardized my life. If that explains why those
Japanese polished me in those airplanes. See,
they already had their props turning, and they
were getting ready to taxi. We caught them just in
time. You caught them in time. Now, did the other
three that Newkirk was with, when Newkirk went in
to hit the base, did the other three follow? Oh, the
other, they stayed. You know, there's a formation
of attack. Did they attack also? They stayed
together. Huh? Did they also attack the air base?
There was nothing on the air base at Lam Long. No, I
mean when they came back over the one that you hit.
No, they didn't come over our base. They just come
down the railroad and pass the railroad station
about three or four miles, which they went by
before. And this time there was a gun on it, though.
Well, obviously, you know, the whole city had been
alerted, and the Army, Japanese Army, as well as
the Air Force was alerted. And it probably was an
armed personnel carrier that was, you know,
alerted and ready, too. In other words, taking on
the conformation of Air Defense. But it was a
heavy-caliber gun. And it just so happened that
they caught him. And I don't know if Kirk was a
terrific boy. He had 10 or 12 of his credit at that
time. OK, so you got back after the raid. This is the
25th of March, which in all sense Oh, he was
absolutely delighted and elated. And as a matter
of fact,
even the Japanese Air Force acknowledged an
attack by the Flying Tiger Demon or something,
whatever it was. But they had never admitted all
their losses. We figured, in my opinion, We had to
have destroyed at least 40 aircraft. There's no
way possible there couldn't have been these 40
aircraft destroyed. And I think we got credit for
10, or paid for 10, divided amongst us. Sure,
right. So that's how you got two and a quarter more.
Yeah. So that gives you your total. I ended up with
nine and a quarter, however it comes out, Terry.
It's on my discharge. That's what I was paid for.
Well, okay, let's continue. You were back up in
Kunming. Well, then, of course, we eventually
went back to Kunming. Yeah, okay. And you stayed
there doing what? And followed the same type of
life for a while, you know, staying on alert and
wondering how we could get into combat. By this
time, you can imagine how we had stung the Japanese
Air Force. They were just, you know, they were
leery of us. We hadn't destroyed these flying
Tiger Demons yet. And here's four airplanes made
this attack. more fighters. So you can imagine how
shaken up they were. Well, so we figured it,
figured it, figured ways to do it, and no way. And
then, by the way, this was a period of where no
combat, that, you know, our morale, we began to
wonder, you know, why stay over here any longer?
And, you know, idle. So it, our morale wasn't too
hot. And the Japanese was pushing on up into
northern Burma and nibbling at the southern
border of Yan'an province of China and making
raids on southern China. So the old man decided,
well, give some action. He called Bob Neill in and
told
him to take, I believe they were, I'll have to refer
to my diary again, I was one of the guys to go on this
one, too. I was always, you know, I was number two in
command. Bob and I developed a very close rapport
and mutual respect. Wherever he went, I went. So, I
went down on this one, and we went to a place in the
south, in the extreme southwestern corner of
China, just north of the Burma border called
Paoshan, P-A-O-S-H-A-N.
First time that I got in combat when I was shot down.
Okay, this is May 4th. So you sat around there for a
month and a half, and finally it's May 4th, 1942.
Okay,
so tell me about this mission, May 4th, 1942.
We had just returned from a sort of a patrol flight
in northern Burma. And Bob Neal had caught a
Japanese observation plane at so altitude, it was
like shooting ducks out of the air and shot him
down. And I kid him when we got back that he ought to
have been shaming himself, catching the poor boy
like that, stepping up on him. But when we got back-
Did he even have any guns on him, an observation
plane? Well, whether he had any guns or not, I don't
know. But I know he never even knew Bob was on him. It
was about 1,000 feet in the air, and Bob hit him. He
just went straight
in. Then we settled down. I started cleaning my
pistol. Didn't have anything to do. We were on a
standing alert. I started cleaning my pistol. We
heard some noises overhead, went outside the
alert track to find two Japanese wreckage ships
high overhead. Bartling and I took off in hopes of
catching them. By the time we got to 80,000 feet,
they were gone. On the way to recover at the field, I
heard Bob Neal on the radio, and I knew he was
already back from Kunming near Paoshan. In a few
minutes, Bob and Mickey showed up over the field.
Apparently, Mickey was okay enough to return to
the field. Bob Neal, Bob Little, one of the aces of
the Flying Tigers, killed about two months after
that, by the way. and I was still involved in
cleaning our pistols when Neil yelled for us to man
our ships. We dashed out to the plains, and by the
time I had started my engine, I looked up and saw the
Jap bomber formation high above and heading
toward our field. It looked like about 25 bombers
and about 18,000 feet. Neil started shooting his
pistol in the air to get everyone's attention and
started running for the ditch immediately behind
our parking area. My engine had warmed up. I sat
there in the cockpit with my hand on the throttle
and paused for a second. Hell, I can make it, I
thought. I shoved the throttle open and headed
straight across the field. I had not gotten into my
parachute or put my helmet on. I was just sitting in
the cockpit. I didn't even have my seatbelt on yet,
and my canter was still open. The only thought
entering my mind was to get airborne and beyond the
edge of the field before the bombs hit. My speed
built up unusually slow, and suddenly my tail
literally jumped off the ground. Damn, I had not
even put up my flaps, which was pre-takeoff
procedure. I had quite a lot of field yet, so I put
them up. I leaped forward and just did manage to
clear the rock barricade at the far end of the
field. I turned to the left and started getting
into my gear as I started a maximum climb. I could
see the bomber formation clearly now. They
skipped the field and were bombing the city. I
wasn't climbing nearly as fast as I expected.
Something was wrong. I had full throttle and RPM.
Oh, hell, I forgot my landing gear and all the haste
and excitement. I got up and then started gaining
on the bomber formations. They were now in a wide
sweeping turn to head back south after dropping
their bomb. I cut across and pulled up in a steeper
climb. In the meantime, I stole a quick look at the
city below. The bombing was almost perfect, right
in the middle of the city. Those yellow bastards, I
thought. I looked around for possible enemy
fighter escort and saw none, but I did pick up the
second wave of about the same number of bombers. So
how many bombers were there? Fifty. Fifty
bombers? Fifty or fifty-four, I'll give you a
question. Two big formats. My goodness. I had a
better chance against them since they were
treading the first enemy waves, so I positioned
myself to concentrate on them. This is
approximate. I was the only one there. You were the
only one? Yeah. See, I really violated orders. Bob
Neal told us all to get in the ditch. It's too late.
So I took off. Thinking, you know, I... And that's
the reason I forgot so many things. They were at
18,000 feet and a single, huge V formation, very
tight. I got about 1,000 feet above and off to the
right. I made a diving left turn and pulled up into
the right rear quarter of the outside flank of the
formation. I closed in on the flank bomber and
squeezed the trigger. My burst completely
enveloped the fuselage, but I saw no smoke or fire.
The two adjacent bombers immediately started
streaming a bluish-white smoke. I knew I hadn't
hit them. They were pulling the old trick of
releasing smoke to attract me to them as wounded
aircraft. We had been briefed on this trick, but
this was the first time I'd seen it. I wasn't about
to take that bait. The bomber on the extreme flank
end pulled away a bit, and this made it even more
obvious. I continued my rear right quarter
attacks at it first, and on my third attack, I saw
his right engine disintegrate and ignite into a
flaming torch. He went down through the overcast.
I continued on the next bomber on the tail of the V.
Is this too detailed? No. Suddenly my guns quit
firing. I had become too engrossed in my attacks. I
had obviously been firing long, by far too long
bursts. Recharging guns produced no results. I
had to be out of ammunition. I pulled away sharply,
and then diving, 180 screen, 180 return to head
back. I had to run out of ammo. I told you before I
wasn't a good gunner. Now where am I? I had chased
some 50 enemy bombers down across northern Burma
and only gotten one. I was downright disappointed
in myself. Also, in my gunnery, I had them all to
myself, and there were no enemy fighter escort
whatsoever. But there was nothing to do now but get
back to Palashan. How far were you? I mean, about
how many miles were you from the air base now to get
back to land? Let me see if I see. I spied the Burma
Road bridge over the Salarain River and felt
better about my position. I knew where I was now and
I had a sufficient field over an action chain
before I slided head-directed to the field. I
couldn't have been
more than sixty or seventy miles, maybe eighty or
seventy miles south of the field. I had begun to
recount everything I had done on the flight and
furthered my remorse that I didn't get more jets.
Soon the field appeared up ahead, and as I got
closer in, I tried to pick up our ground station on
the radio. Several calls brought no reply, and I
was now in a steep dive toward the field. I leveled
out and did a slow roll as I crossed over the alert
area. I tried the radio again with the same results
and decided that they were probably in the
ditches. I thought I'd make a wide turn around the
city and spread out my traffic pattern to examine
the bomb damage in the city. What a sight. The city
had been spilling over with evacuees, and they
were jammed throughout the place. The Japanese
bombs had caught them without any warning. Fire
seemed to be engulfing the entire city, and I could
see many buildings and houses blown to bits. My
approach to the field took me squarely over the
middle of the city, and after one last look, I
concentrated on the landing approach and slowed
down to get my flaps and landing gear down. I had
just moved the gear lever forward when I heard
several loud explosions. The noise stunned me for
a second, and I immediately concluded that my
landing gear hydraulic system had blown up. I had
been having trouble with my gear operating
correctly the last several days, but I never
really found anything wrong with it. I decided to
try to recycle the gear lever, and when I reached
down, I cried out in pain. I had stuck my left hand
with no gloves on in a raging fire. I unconsciously
swung my head around and looked to my rear. There
they were, three Jap Zeros right on my tail and
firing like mad at me. The explosions were
explosive rounds of ammo hitting the armor plate
behind my seat. The bullets had gone through my
fuselage tank, but still had a few gallons of fuel
in it before impacting the armor plate. The
fuselage tank had also exploded, and the fire was
whipping into my lower rear cockpit and then up
around my lower body. What a stoop I had been. I had
become so engrossed with the bombing scene below
that I had made that fatal mistake that a fighter
pilot should never get caught doing. I hadn't
suspected enemy fighters in the area.
Incidentally, looking back now, that was exactly
the way they had planned it. They had expected all
of us to get off, and they'd catch all of us just
landing without any fuel, and then they'd just
annihilate us. The Japs had laid this attack on a
little different. They knew our situation
perfectly from the two recce flights that had just
preceded the bombers. They decided to forego the
fighters as an escort and hold them off and away
from the field with the idea of catching all of us
when we returned to the field. low on ammunition
and gas, and that is exactly how they caught me. For
a split second, I think I actually was on the verge
of giving up. That's true. I remember it very
vividly. But the old human mind and body being what
it is would not let me. I recall very vividly this
day that I am touching this experience, that I
leaned forward as far as my seatbelt would permit,
closed my eyes because the fire had begun to
completely engulf me, reached over with my right
hand to grasp the canopy crank and rolled it fully
back. Unhooked my seat belt with my left hand and
then put both hands on the stick and went through
the motion of what I knew would make the ship climb
abruptly and roll over one half turn to the right.
How high were you? How was your altitude? I was on my
approach about ready to flare out on the landing.
I'd say... 300 feet above the ground, 200 feet. So
you needed more altitude before you jumped.
Right. So I climbed up. See, when I pulled a stick
up, I figured I'd climb a little and just pause a few
seconds to get some altitude. In other words, I was
doing like this. I was going to do like this. Sure.
And then fall out. And that's the maneuver I went
through. would make the ship climb abruptly and
roll over one half turn to the right. Then I took my
hand off the control column and reached for the
right side of the cockpit to get out of the seat. The
step between grabbed me as the upper part of my body
protruded outside of the cockpit. It literally
dragged me out of the cockpit. I had forgotten my
earphone connection to the radio plug, but the
force of the wind tore it loose. I knew I was out of
the airplane, and I opened my eyes. One minute I
would see the blue sky, and the next I would see the
ground. I realized I was tumbling. I looked down to
find a metal ring to pull my parachute, jerked it
wildly. I immediately felt it tugging and then a
violent jerk. I was sitting in a parachute strap
and floating down the earth. Suddenly I became
terrified. Those dirty yellow sons of bitches
will scrape me like they did at Rangoon.
Automatically I started praying. And I mean this.
I started praying. Now, about how high were you at
this time after you jumped? How was your altitude
here? And I must have been doing it aloud because I
can remember it so vividly. I prayed devoutly to
God. I was doing it with my eyes closed. I opened my
eyes to look for the zebras, and it was like I
suppose heaven would be. They had pulled away and
were heading southward. Looking down, I saw the
ground rushing up at me, and I knew it would hit
backwards if I didn't do something. To answer your
question, I couldn't have been. Well, they told me
later on from the ground. I probably fell out of the
airplane 500 feet. So the parachute probably
opened about 200 feet. I wasn't, it wasn't very
long I had my feet on the ground after it opened. And
that's probably one reason they didn't break me,
they didn't have time to get back up. I tried to kick
around my harness and I did get about halfway
around when I hit. I fell across some large
sun-dried clouds of earth in a rice paddy.
The parachute gradually floated to the ground
beside me as I tumbled a few times across the
ground. I sat up and realized I still had the grip
cord and metal ring in my right hand. Looking back
now, it must have been in an iron grip. I have it in my
memo right now. Unusual to ever do that. Usually
drop it. I came to my senses and punched a quick
release on the parachute hornet. The strap fell
away and I got up to run to a nearby knoll as a barrier
to a possible strafing run by a lone Japanese
fighter. I squatted there watching the remaining
Japanese fighters make strafing passes on the
field. I didn't realize it at the time, but I was
squatting behind a traditional Chinese burial
mound of earth in the cemetery. I had come down in a
Chinese cemetery about a mile from the landing
field. Out of nowhere came a P-40 right on the tail
of a Japanese as both of them went directly across
the field in what was obviously a Jap strafing
attack. It was, I learned later, old Bob Little,
who had gotten into the air after the bombers had
dropped their bombs. See, he knew I'd be coming
back. I felt a burning sensation about my neck and
shoulders and suddenly realized that my scarf and
flying suit must be on fire. It happened that a
small stream was flowing through the cemetery
where I was crouched, so I laid down and watered in
the water on my back. My head was hurting and I
unconsciously reached up to rub it. I felt
something wet and threw my hand away to look at it.
It was blood. Jesus Christ. I looked at my hands.
They had been badly burned and the skin had already
been torn loose in several areas. Blisters were
forming. My face and neck and upper shoulder were
scorched, and in some cases erupting in blisters.
My eyebrows were gone. Pain began to set in. There
were many Chinese natives in the cemetery
crashing behind a burial hill, just as I was. I
motioned for one of them to come over to me. He
racked warily, but did start walking slowly
toward me. He had one hand behind his back. I went
through the gestures of picking up a telephone and
calling someone and uttered the usual Chinese
greeting, wah, wah, wah, wah, wah. I did not have my
flying jacket on, the back of which was sewn the
Chinese-American flag and directly written in
Chinese to help us. But somehow he must have gotten
a message, for he smiled lightly and brought his
hand from behind his back to reveal a large rock. He
was ready to give me the word, thinking I was the
enemy. He motioned for me to follow him and led me
off to a cluster of huts. We entered one, and a group
of Chinese peasants looked at me with no signs of
any kind of emotion. And they can do that. But there
was a telephone. Somehow I got them to understand
the words of my American doctor. We had a doc down
there, by the way. It's amazing what sign language
can do between human beings in an emergency. I
didn't talk to anyone on the phone, but one Chinese
was on it continually, and I can only assume that
the word got back to our AVG hospital. Old Doc
Richards appeared in the doorway all of a sudden. I
will never forget that moment. The agony of my
burns led me on the verge of passing out. I honestly
wanted to die to get out of the pain. I would lie
down, get up, walk around, lie down, get up, hold my
hands up in the air to reduce the circulation of
throbbing pain. Cry out aloud and pray.
They took my clothes off, all except my shorts. My
helmet revealed two longitudinal tears, and I
remember examining it. Apparently the armor
plate and the P-40 was tapered off at the top to
resemble the marrying head on the shoulders of a
man. Had barely kept all but a couple of bullets
from hitting me, otherwise I would have been
killed. Two bullets had barely missed the armor
plate, but just enough to still rip past my head,
close enough to scar my scalp and bring blood. I
still have some of those shrapnel bits in my scalp
now, about the size of pinheads. Doc greeted me as
he would his son. I practically fell in his arms
with only one plea. Get me out of this pain. He went
right to work. My head was not too bad, this small
lesion from the grazing bullets. My eyelashes and
eyebrows were gone. My face was blistered
slightly on the left side, clearly outlying the
bit of my helmet strapped across my face. Around
the hairline of my neck was an open wound of burnt
flesh where the helmet connection plugged to my
aircraft radio dug into my flesh when I forgot to
unhook it upon bailing out. My shoulder blades
were heavily blistered, and one blister ran down
the middle of my back some six or eight inches. My
right thumb was blistered, but my whole left hand
looked terrible, a third-degree burn. I never saw
my plane hit the ground. Peden, a mechanic on the
ground, said he had hit and bounced for 100 yards or
so and then lined up in a ball of fire. Top Rich and
Bob Neal both had fired their pistols at me, trying
to get my attention, but zeroes were on the table. I
learned from them that they were actually firing
at me through a good 270 degrees on my turn over the
city. Prior to rolling out on my approach to the
field, they never did hit me until I straightened
up. Doc gave me a shot in the arm, a couple of
capsules or something, and then sat for a minute or
so to let the stuff set in. Then he started pulling
the skin off the blister. He looked at the U.S. Army
Air Corps ring on my left hand and said that it had to
come off. I just peered back at the dope again and
grabbed me. Even then, though, when he pulled the
ring off with the burned flesh with it, I nearly hit
the ceiling. To top that off, he started pouring
peroxide on the open wall places. I guess it was on
the verge of minor conversion, but fortunately
the dope took hold. Somehow I felt glad that he was
doing whatever he was. Is this getting that? Am I
too fast? No. He smeared gentian violet all over
the upper part of my body and very heavily over the
burned portions. I rapidly became a gooey mess. He
asked me if I could walk, and I replied that I could.
My socks were wet, and I had lost my boots. A Chinese
lady furnished me with a pair of sneakers, and we
left for the jeeps outside. My flying suit had been
tied at the waistline to keep it off my burns and the
upper part of my body. On the way through the rice
paddy to the jeeps, Bob Neal came up and told Doc
Richards that Benny Fauché was in a bad way from
bomb shrapnel. A Chinese doctor had wanted to
amputate one of Benny's legs. He was one of our
pilots. But he would not have it and kept yelling
for Dr. Rich. I heard the doctor go on and take care
of Benny and that I was okay now. We met Bob Little at
the junction with the main city road and we joked
about the whole deal. I had gotten one and he hadn't
gotten any. By now, the dope had taken over and I
could feel nothing. Hence, Denny Bob Foshay died.
Bob Neal and Bob Little A Chinese interpreter and I
clambered aboard another jeep and struck out
through the city for the hospital. Well, we drove
through the city, and I remember the, well, I saw
one body with no leg, arms, or head, another with
his skull half gone. Once Bob Little had to get out
of the jeep to move a large timber from our path.
When he heaved to the side, a human head rolled
across the road. The air was filled with the smell
of burning flesh, and if you have once smelled this
odor, you will never forget it. One very pitiful
sight was a wedding Chinese mother in the middle of
the road on her knees with a dead child in her arms
and her equally stricken husband at her side. Had I
not been under the influence of dope, I'm sure it
would have hooked Chuck right there. At times, I
thought Neil and Little both would vomit. None of
us ever said a word to each other during that entire
tip. We learned it before she had died.
About 30 minutes after arriving at the hospital,
we had another scare. And all of a sudden, me and my
dragon cover all ran into the ditches.
Doc gave me some sleeping pills. Thank God I was
still alive. And they done a blister pack and went
to sleep. And that was the end of the 4th of May. What
a day.
I don't know if you can still see the scar right
there. Is that one of the hair on it? Subsequent to
this, of
course,
we lost all the other airplanes on the ground. How
many were there on the ground? I think we had six.
Bob Little got off with one, so the four airplanes
were lost. I think we later on recovered one or two
of those. Did Little lose his plane? No, no. He got
back in all right. And this is part of the story on
the return that I want to tell you about. It's
rather interesting.
We had to get out of there right away. It was a fun day
because we were afraid he'd come back over here and
catch us. They were determined to knock us out.
They were doing a good job so far. so the next day we
had a uh paul shan paul shan the next day on may the
fifth uh we uh had a the youngest the the united
states army air corps air transport command had
begun to come in there and there was a gooney bird
c40 a c uh dc3 type that uh one of the pilots uh uh from
texas i'm kidding was coming there to pick us up so
we got as much uh salvaged out of the airplane if we
could. The airmen did, like 50 calibers, you know,
took them out of the airplane, and threw them all in
the back of this airplane, and we're going to
evacuate the place. And Benny Fauché's body
actually was still limp. We put it, the doc put it
right in the entrance of the airplane and laid it up
against the back
wall of the thing, and then covered him with a
blanket. He was just sitting there. cover him with
a blanket. Of course, I was still down my waist with
the cover on. Bob Neal got on. And Bob Little was
going to take his good airplane. He got refueling
on. He was going to stay with us, escort us, at least
escort this airplane, back over up to Kunming.
That was a distance of some maybe an hour and
20-minute flight.
And we wanted to get out of there as soon as we could.
So in our haste and all, everybody got on the
airplane. The vice commander of the American
Voluntary Group, we called him the vice
commander, he was sort of an administrator, a guy
by the name of Happy Greenlaw. He was the husband of
the gal who wrote The Tiger and the Lady, Olga
Greenlaw. And she was supposedly the historian of
the ABG, and she didn't give her anything to get a
hold of this. He gave me a great big slug of Johnny
Walker Red Label. Every few seconds and a few
minutes on the airplane on the way up, he'd give me
another slug. And by the time we got up to Kunming, I
was about half tight. But the gentian violet, you
may have seen it sad, but to put on for burns in Notre
Dame, I smeared with it. How do you spell it?
G-E-N-T-I-A-N, velvet. It's very good for burns.
It's a gelatin type stuff. And once you get it on
you, you have to let it wear off. There's no way to
clean it off. It turned to purple. So for a long,
long time, they called me Deep Purple in the
deployment. But on the way up, we took off. Bob
Little was escorting us. Next thing we know, we got
up to what I assume was a cruising altitude above
the mountain, like 6,000 or 8,000 feet. And I
looked out the window, and here's Bob Neal and his
P-40 round the wing of this airplane, just
violently wiggling his wings, you know, and
waving his hands. I told Bob, I said, what time is
Bob Little? He looked out there. He went up to the
front of the airplane and told Tex, whatever his
name was. Told the pilot. Yeah, told the pilot to
look over there and
couldn't communicate. And Bob Little kept doing
like that. And finally, Bob Neal says, well,
what's he doing? He says, what do you want us to turn
around for? He says, we're going to Kunming,
aren't we? The pilot looked at him and said, no,
we're not going to Kunming, we're going to, uh,
Dinjian, India. And Bob said, you turn this thing
around, we're going to Kunming. The guy had, for
some reason or another, he was returning to India
over the hump, which had been about a three hour
flight. So he got him turned around and we
proceeded on up to Kunming. So it hadn't been for
not old, had it not been for Bob Little, we, uh...
You would have gone to India. Yeah. Well, I wanted
to tell you that. And then we got to Harrison Holt
Medicine, of course, and he was very concerned
about me, and
that's how I was. How long did it take before your
condition improved? They immediately put me in
the hospital, and I stayed in the hospital. We had
two nurses very fondly. Were they American or
Chinese? American.
Joe... So you were in the hospital for how long? I
stayed in the hospital about Just about two weeks.
And then I went back over the house and recuperated
a few days, going to Charlie. Thereafter, we went
back in the P-40 and we were hit. So it was about
three weeks before you were back in the airplanes.
Yeah. As a matter of fact, I think it was in April, we
headed for Chongqing for some more episodes down
in Kuala Lumpur.
OK. We're already in Maine here. Kunming. We went
to Chongqing, north of Kunming. And then later on,
we're going to fly from Chongqing down to Kualian.
No, but you said April. Well, see, this happened in
May. I'm sorry, May. June.
In June, we went to Chongqing.
24th of May. June. 24th of May. Oh, okay. We went to
Chongqing, China, 24th of May. And what was your
mission down there? Well, there again, the
Japanese had been bombing Chongqing. They didn't
have any air defense. They didn't have any air
force. So we were going to do Chongqing. Oh, there
it is. Okay. So it's north. Yeah. And now that the
nationalist capital of China.
We, again, we were going to, matter of fact, we, by
that time, we had the three squadrons practically
together at Kunming. What had left? What was left
of your original 70 planes or so? What was left? Oh,
no, I'd say we had... But originally you had about
70, so what was left? I'd say we had about... Oh,
yeah, we started getting some P-40Es back. I mean,
the Air Force started sending us some P-40Es. I
think two or three of the pilots had been over in
India and buried in about five P-40Es, newer type
aircraft. We must have had at least 45, 50 or so, at
least. And most of them were concentrated in
Kunming. So your squadron is up at Chongqing? Our
squadron and part of another squadron was to take
off and make a mass flight to Chongqing. And the
idea was, again, a little bit of vocal
intelligence or psychological tactic. As I say,
the Japs had been hitting Chongqing freely. And to
get in the water some way would at least defend
against it. And also at this time, it was obvious
the Japanese were going to redirect their effort
to get taken over China from the coast and the west
and the east, rather than up through Burma. They
had sort of given up the idea of coming up through
Burma. Logistically, it was almost impossible.
So the old man sent, I think it was about 24
airplanes, two of them, about 12 in each,
something like that. And we flew up to Chongqing.
and would make a pass around over the city and come
back, fly way out from the city. Then we'd come back
and fly over the city again and make it look like,
you know, maybe in a different formation,
something like that. Make it look like an awful lot
of P-40s had come into Chongqing because we knew
damn well there was a lot of spies, you know,
Japanese in the city. Then we went on out and landed
at the field. Well, actually, they quit bombing
Chongqing. Well, after we got there, the bombers
came out. So the word got back to you? Oh yeah. And
then we stayed there for a while and there's really
no episodes there worth mentioning, except we did
go on alert. What was the Capitol like? It took
about two hours to drive along the tortuous
country roads and over the mountains, into the
Capitol proper. And I went in only a couple of
times. And I think when they're getting paid, the
headquarters of the CAMCOR, Central Aircraft
Manufacturing Company, which paid us, was in the
capital, you know, where the Lend-Lease
arrangement and everything was made. Were there
more Americans in there? We had two of our liaison
boys assigned there. Jim Cross, one of the buddies
that went over with us, he asked for it.